Random:

Fantasy themed ideas (for plot crazy glue or similar).

A fantasy world exists, either in cyberspace, or in an alternate universe.
This fantasy world has Elves, Dwarfs, Halflings, Orcs, an evil-overlord, ...

Magic:
"Light Magic" vs "Dark Magic";
light magic users consume light magic, producing dark-magic as a byproduct;
dark magic users consume dark magic, producing light-magic as a byproduct;
normally they don't mix well, and are prone to neutralize;
magical dead-zones exist, where there is very little magical energy.

Light/Dark is not the same as good/evil, but may often lean this way.

Races:
High-Elves, strong magic, light-magic users;
Dark-Elves, strong magic, dark-magic users;
Halflings, weak magic, light-magic users;
Dwarves, weak magic, dark-magic users;
Humans, weak magic, neutral magic alignment (native to dead-zones);
Orcs/Trolls/..., medium magic, dark-magic users;

Monsters, variable, typically dark-magic users;
Mystical Beasts, variable, typically light-magic users;
Animals, weak magic, variable (Cows/Sheep light, Pigs/Goats dark).

Core Races:
Elves (High/Dark) and Humans, same basic race, but adapted to different environments (lack of elf triats in humans being due to their adaptation to dead-zones).
Halflings and Dwarves: same race, but adapted to light and dark environments, like elves, they need magic to thrive, but don't generally use magic directly.


Industry:

Orcs, run a burger chain:
They have halflings in a giant cave raising cattle and growing crops (with "the eye" as the sun), supplying most of the meat and bread;
The major use of these farms, however, is to convert light magic into dark magic.

Dwarves: make lots of weapons and armor.

Elves: Make most magical implements, including "bags of holding".

Have a giant monster hidden under ground, which they use as a giant dark to light magic converter. The magic from the monster is used to power their bag-of-holding network, as each bag is linked essentially to a storage chamber located underground, not too far from the monster. This is because they need large amounts of magic to hold all of the portals open.

